First edition, limited.
Editor Harlan Ellison
Illustrator Ed Emshwiller, interior
Cover artist Ed Emshwiller
Country United States
Language English
Series Dangerous Visions
Genre Science fiction
Publisher Doubleday
Publication date March 17, 1972
Media type Print (Hardcover)
Pages 760
ISBN 0385079532
OCLC 308501
Dewey Decimal 823.0876
LC Class PZ1.E473 Ag PS648.S3
Preceded by Dangerous Visions
Followed by The Last Dangerous Visions (unpublished)
Again, Dangerous Visions (1972) is a science fiction short story anthology, edited by Harlan Ellison. It is the follow-up to Dangerous Visions (1967), also edited by Ellison. Cover art and interior illustrations are by Ed Emshwiller.
Like its predecessor, Again, Dangerous Visions, and many of the collected stories, have received awards recognition. "The Word for World is Forest", by Ursula K. Le Guin, won the 1973 Hugo for Best Novella.[1] "When It Changed", by Joanna Russ, won a 1972 Nebula Award for Best Short Story.[2] Harlan Ellison was recognized with a special Hugo Award for anthologizing, his second special award, in 1972.[3]
Again, Dangerous Visions was released as a two-volume paperback edition by Signet in the United States, and by Pan in the United Kingdom. A sequel was planned, The Last Dangerous Visions, but was never published.
The first edition was a hardback limited release of 6,500 numbered and signed copies.[4]
Each story is preceded by an introduction written by Ellison
Introduction: "An Assault of New Dreamers", by Harlan Ellison
"The Counterpoint of View", by John Heidenry
"Ching Witch!", by Ross Rocklynne
"The Word for World Is Forest", by Ursula K. Le Guin (Hugo Award for Best Novella)
"For Value Received", by Andrew J. Offutt
"Mathoms From the Time Closet", by Gene Wolfe
"Robot's Story", by Gene Wolfe
"Against The Lafayette Escadrille", by Gene Wolfe
"Loco Parentis", by Gene Wolfe
"Time Travel For Pedestrians", by Ray Nelson
"Christ, Old Student in a New School", poem by Ray Bradbury
"King of the Hill", by Chad Oliver
"The 10:00 Report is Brought to You By...", by Edward Bryant
"The Funeral", by Kate Wilhelm
"Harry the Hare", by James B. Hemesath
"When It Changed", by Joanna Russ (Nebula Award for Best Short Story)
"The Big Space Fuck", by Kurt Vonnegut
"Bounty", by T. L. Sherred
"Still-Life", by Barry N. Malzberg (as by K. M. O'Donnell)
"Stoned Counsel", by H. H. Hollis
"Monitored Dreams and Strategic Cremations", by Bernard Wolfe
"The Bisquit Position", by Bernard Wolfe
"The Girl With Rapid Eye Movements", by Bernard Wolfe
"With A Finger in My I", by David Gerrold
"In the Barn", by Piers Anthony
"Soundless Evening", by Lee Hoffman
[A spot], by Gahan Wilson
"The Test-Tube Creature, Afterward", by Joan Bernott
"And the Sea Like Mirrors", by Gregory Benford
"Bed Sheets Are White", by Evelyn Lief
"Tissue", by James Sallis
"At the Fitting Shop", by James Sallis
"53rd American Dream", by James Sallis
"Elouise And The Doctors of the Planet Pergamon", by Josephine Saxton
"Chuck Berry, Won't You Please Come Home", by Ken McCullough
"Epiphany For Aliens", by David Kerr
"Eye of the Beholder", by Burt K. Filer
"Moth Race", by Richard Hill
"In Re Glover", by Leonard Tushnet
"Zero Gee", by Ben Bova
"A Mouse in the Walls of the Global Village", by Dean R. Koontz
"Getting Along", by James Blish and Judith Ann Lawrence
"Totenbüch", by Parra y Figuéredo, as by A. Parra (y Figuerado).
"Things Lost", by Thomas M. Disch
"With the Bentfin Boomer Boys on Little Old New Alabama", novella by Richard A. Lupoff
"Lamia Mutable", by M John Harrison
"Last Train to Kankakee", by Robin Scott
"Empire of the Sun", by Andrew Weiner
"Ozymandias", by Terry Carr
"The Milk of Paradise", by James Tiptree, Jr
Dangerous Visions series listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
Again, Dangerous Visions title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
