Cover of first edition (hardcover)
Author Larry Niven Jerry Pournelle
Cover artist Michael Whelan
Country United States
Language English
Genre Science fiction
Publisher Del Rey Books
Publication date May 12, 1985
Media type Print (hardback & paperback)
Pages 495 pages (first edition, hardcover)
ISBN 0-345-32347-5 (first edition, hardcover)
OCLC 11316829
Dewey Decimal 813/.54 19
LC Class PS3564.I9 F6 1985
Footfall is a 1985 science fiction novel by American writers Larry Niven and Jerry Pournelle. The book depicts the arrival of members of an alien species called the Fithp that have traveled to the solar system from Alpha Centauri in a large spacecraft driven by a Bussard ramjet. Their intent is conquest of the planet Earth.
The alien Fithp resemble baby elephants with multiple prehensile trunks. They possess more advanced technology than humans, but have developed none of it on their own. In the distant past on their planet, another species was dominant. This predecessor species badly damaged the environment, rendering themselves and many other species extinct, but left behind their knowledge inscribed on large stone cubes, from which the Fithp have gained their technology. Facing possible extinction due to the long-term effects of biological weapons, a group of high-ranking Fithp were selected to escape to the stars. The Chtaptisk Fithp ('Traveling Herd') are divided between 'Sleepers' and 'Spaceborn', as the ship is both a generation ship and a sleeper ship. The original leaders are subordinate to the Spaceborn, who are prepared to start a space based civilization, but are still dedicated to the generations-old ideal of conquest.
The Fithp are herd creatures, and fight wars differently from humans. When two herds meet, they fight until it is evident which is dominant; fighting then ceases and the losers are incorporated into the winning herd. The Fithp are confused by human attempts at peaceful contact. Upon arrival, they attack the Soviet space station (the Soviets still being a major world superpower) where Soviets and Americans wait to greet them. They proceed to destroy military sites and important infrastructure on Earth. United States Congressman Wes Dawson and several Soviet cosmonauts are captured from the ruins of the space station.
The human characters fall into two major groups, those on Earth and those who are taken aboard the Fithp spaceship as captives. Civilians are used to show the effects of the war on day-to-day life in the United States, while military and government personnel convey a more strategic overview of events. Science fiction writers are employed as technical advisers on alien technology and behavior; the characters are based on real writers, including Niven ("Nat Reynolds"), Pournelle ("Wade Curtis"), and Robert Anson Heinlein ("Bob Anson").
After their initial assault, the Fithp land ground forces in the center of North America, primarily in and around Kansas. They initially repel attacks with orbital lasers and kinetic energy weapons, but a combined Soviet and U.S. nuclear attack wipes out their beachhead. The Fithp, who are familiar with nuclear weapons but prefer to use cleaner ones, are shocked by what they consider the barbarity of humans' willingness to "foul their own garden" with radioactivity. The Fithp respond to the defeat of their invasion by dropping a large asteroid into the Indian Ocean, whose impact results in environmental damage on a global scale, in particular the almost total destruction of India. The Fithp then invade most of Africa, successfully subjugating most of the people on the continent. On numerous occasions, the Fithp are assisted by warlords seeking to keep their power over the masses.
The U.S. secretly builds a large, heavily armed spacecraft in the State of Washington propelled by nuclear bombs (a real concept known as Project Orion). The ship is named after the Biblical Archangel Michael, who cast Lucifer out of Heaven. The Michael launches and battles through small enemy "digit" ships in orbit. Though seriously damaged, she pursues the alien mothership. One of the space shuttles carried aboard Michael rams the Fithp ship, seriously damaging it.
On Earth, U.S. President David Coffey receives an offer of conditional surrender from the Fithp. Coffey is willing to let the Fithp withdraw into space, and is reluctant to destroy their technology and cargo of females and children. He is opposed by his advisors, who feel that by allowing the Fithp to escape and regroup, he risks the whole of humanity. When Coffey seemingly folds under the pressure, National Security Adviser Admiral Carrell stages a bloodless coup d'etat, circumventing the President and communicating the rejection of the aliens' terms. An act of sabotage by the humans aboard the alien vessel disables the Fithp engines, allowing the Michael to inflict heavy damage, which forces the Fithp to accept humanity as the stronger species and surrender themselves to become part of the human "herd". In the final scene, the Fithp leader lies down on his back in a submissive gesture, and allows former captive Congressman Wes Dawson to place his foot on his chest, this being the formal Fithp gesture of surrender.
c. 1915: The Chtaptisk Fithp ("Traveler Herd") leave Alpha Centauri for Earth on their spacecraft, the Thuktun Flishithy ("Message Bearer").
c. 1919: The sleepers go into their death-sleep.
September 1976: Thuktun Flishithy swings around the Sun, maneuvering towards Saturn.
November 1976: Thuktun Flishithy reaches Saturn.
June 1980: Thuktun Flishithy has been resupplied.
June 1981: The Fithp have established themselves on the Foot, an asteroid colony.
April 1995: The Thuktun Flishithy begins its journey towards the Earth.
May 1995: Human astronomers in Hawaii realize that there is an alien ship on a trajectory towards the Earth.
June 1995: The initial attack of the Fithp. Kinetic weapons wreak havoc on the Earth, and satellites are shot down; the Soviet space station Kosmograd is destroyed, and its surviving passengers captured.
July 1995: The Fithp launch an invasion of Kansas. Shortly thereafter the Jayhawk Wars begin, a conventional attack against Fithp forces which is rapidly destroyed using space support. About two weeks later, the Americans and Soviets cooperate in a combined nuclear retaliation that defeats the Fithp forces and wrecks much of Kansas in the process.
August 1995: Footfall. The Fithp drop the Foot into the Indian Ocean; tsunamis devastate surrounding landmasses, while the entire globe is enveloped in an endless salty rainstorm. India is practically destroyed, while the Fithp successfully invade much of Africa.
July 1996: The flight of the Michael; ends with the formal surrender of the Chtaptisk Fithp to US Congressman Wes Dawson.
Footfall was nominated for the 1986 Hugo Award for Best Novel and the 1986 Locus Award for Best Science Fiction Novel,[1] and was a No. 1 New York Times Bestseller.[2]
Kirkus Reviews considered it to be "(o)verblown and largely underdone", judging it to be "more tedious and less thoughtful" than previous joint Niven–Pournelle works, with "barely relevant" subplots and a "cumbersome cast of thousands", but praising the fithp society as "particularly well worked-out".[3]
David Langford called it a "ripping yarn", but stated that it had "typical blockbuster flaws", including slow pacing and an overly large cast with less-than-relevant characters; he also noted that "(t)he authors' enthusiasm for space weaponry comes over disturbingly strongly".[4] James Nicoll found it to have "the mediocrity and tedium of a much longer novel", with weak characterization, and a scientifically inaccurate portrayal of the effects of the asteroid's impact, but conceded that it was better than the majority of works in its subgenre, and commended Niven for his portrayal of the fithp.[5]
Lucifer's Hammer, another Pournelle-Niven novel with an apocalyptic kinetic strike by an extraterrestrial bolide.
An artistic rendering of the Michael
