Kingdom of Tunisia Royaume de Tunisie المملكة التونسية
1956–1957
Flag Coat of arms
Anthem: Salam al-Bey
Location of Tunisia in northern Africa.
Capital Tunis
Common languages Tunisian Arabic, French
Religion Islam
Government Constitutional monarchy
King

• 1956–1957 Muhammad VIII al-Amin

History

• Tunisian independence March 20 1956
• declaration of the republic July 25 1957

Currency Tunisian franc
ISO 3166 code TN
Preceded by Succeeded by French protectorate of Tunisia Tunisia
Preceded by Succeeded by
French protectorate of Tunisia Tunisia
French protectorate of Tunisia
Tunisia
The Kingdom of Tunisia (French: Royaume de Tunisie; Arabic: المملكة التونسية‎ el-Mamlka et-Tūnsīya) was a short-lived kingdom established on 20 March 1956 after the Tunisian independence and lasted until the declaration of the republic on 25 July 1957.
An independence movement lasting many decades eventually prevailed, leading to the end of the French protectorate (commenced in 1881). In 1954 the Tunisian struggle and consequent civil disturbances resulted in the start of negotiations for autonomy between France and the Neo Destour political party (essentially under Habib Bourguiba) supported by the Tunisian labor unions and by the Arab League. The agreed Convention of April, 1955, stated that France would retain control of the army and foreign affairs while granting autonomy, which was to begin the following year. Bourguiba was released from prison by the French to a tumultuous welcome. This compromise, however, split the Neo Destour; eventually it led to suppression of its left wing, and expulsion of its radical, pan-Arab leader Salah ben Youssef (or Yusuf), who later fled to Egypt. This resolution of intra-party strife signalled that Neo Destour would pursue a moderate path. The French then terminated their protectorate over Morocco, in order to concentrate their forces in Algeria. In reaction, and following the strong public opinion voiced by Tunisians, Bourguiba pressed for independence. The French, overcoming the heated objections of the French settlers, eventually acceded and protocols were drafted. On 20 March 1956, Tunisia achieved its full sovereignty. In July Tunisia's application for membership in the United Nations was accepted.
The French conceived an independent Tunisia as a constitutional monarchy ruled by the Bey of Tunis, Muhammad VIII al-Amin Bey (Lamine or Amin Bey). The Bey was an institution that dated back to the early Ottoman era. The prior Bey Muhammad VII al-Munsif (Moncef Bey) had been a popular nationalist, but Amin Bey was both considered by some to be compromised by the French, by others to be a youssefist. Already scheduled elections were held on 25 March 1956; due to secret arrangements negotiated by Bourguiba with the Bey the voters choose only party lists, not candidates. This arrangement made it easier for the Neo Destour party to keep out any youssefist or other dissidents, and to maintain party discipline.[1] The elections were then swept by the Neo Destour party, whose leader Habib Bourguiba (Habib Abu Ruqaiba) became prime minister. On 25 July 1957, the monarchy was abolished, the beylical office terminated, and Tunisia proclaimed a Republic. The assembly then made Bourguiba the first president, of what would be a single-party state.[2][3][4][5][6]
French protectorate of Tunisia
Beylik of Tunis
History of modern Tunisia
Coordinates: 36°50′N 10°9′E﻿ / ﻿36.833°N 10.150°E﻿ / 36.833; 10.150
