
Meaghan Martin
Martin at the Hannah Montana: The Movie premiere in April 2009
Born Meaghan Jette Martin (1992-02-17) February 17, 1992 (age 27) Fallon, Nevada, U.S.
Alma mater London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art
Occupation Actress, singer
Years active 2007–present
Height 1.64 m (5 ft 5 in)
Spouse(s) Oli Higginson (m. 2016)
Meaghan Jette Martin (/ˈmeɪɡən/; born February 17, 1992)[1] is an American actress and singer. She is best known for her role as Tess Tyler in the Disney Channel television films Camp Rock and its sequel Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam. Martin starred in the ABC Family television series, 10 Things I Hate About You as Bianca Stratford. Martin is also known for lending her voice for Naminé in the video game series Kingdom Hearts as well as voicing and motion capturing Jessica from the video game Until Dawn.
Martin was born in Las Vegas, Nevada and has two brothers and one sister. She started modeling at age five.[1] Martin also appeared in several community theater productions in Las Vegas such as Peter Pan and performed for her Showteam and later made her professional theater debut in a Los Angeles production of 13.[1][2] She appeared in several television commercials such as for Cabbage Patch Kids and Barbie.[1]
Martin started her acting career in 2007, such as the television programs Nickelodeon's Just Jordan and CBS's Close to Home, as well as a guest stint in the Disney Channel series The Suite Life of Zack & Cody. Martin eventually cast as the lead antagonist Tess Tyler in the Disney Channel original movie, Camp Rock, starring Demi Lovato and the Jonas Brothers. Martin was selected by TV Guide in 2008, as one of the "13 Hottest Young Stars to Watch".[3] She was the online host for the 2008 Disney Channel Games.
Martin voiced the character Naminé in all subsequent releases in Kingdom Hearts series, replacing Brittany Snow, who did not return to the series. Martin starred in the ABC Family sitcom 10 Things I Hate About You as Bianca (originated by Larisa Oleynik in the film version). She also had the role of Megan Kennedy in the independent film Dear Lemon Lima. Martin returned to reprise her role as Tess Tyler in Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam, premiered on September 3, 2010, on Disney Channel. In 2011, Martin played the main character Jo in the television film Mean Girls 2, the sequel of the 2004 film Mean Girls. Martin also played the role of Aubrey in the film Sironia.
On June 16, 2011, Martin appeared for one night in Super Summer Theatre's live production of "Annie" at Spring Mountain Ranch in Las Vegas, Nevada, in the role of Star-To-Be. Martin is also starring in the web series Wendy as the title character alongside Tyler Blackburn. Wendy is a dark twist on 'Peter Pan'. The series premiered on macys.com on September 15, 2011. In 2013, Martin appeared in the film adaptation Geography Club as Trish, while she appeared in the thriller The Good Mother was aired on Lifetime Channel and cast as Julie #2 in MTV's Awkward, replacing Sophie Tilson. Martin voiced the character of Jessica in the PlayStation 4 exclusive Until Dawn.
Martin trained as an actor in London, England. In September 2016 she graduated from the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art (LAMDA).[citation needed] After re-locating permanently to the UK, it was announced on April 9, 2019 that Martin would make her professional London stage debut in Tony award-winning playwright Christopher Durang's dark comedy The Actor's Nightmare. The show is a dark satire exploring the entertainment industry and features many of Durang's critically acclaimed works, including: Mrs Sorken, Business Lunch at the Russian Tea Room, Medea, Woman Stand-up, and The Actor's Nightmare. She will star in the world premiere production which plays at London's Park Theatre (London), July 16 – August 10, 2019.
Martin recorded two songs in Camp Rock, "Too Cool" and "2 Stars". Martin sang a version of "When You Wish Upon a Star" for the 2009 re-release of Disney's Pinocchio, as well as appearing in the related music video. The song debuted at number fifty-two on Billboard's Hot Dance Club Songs chart, becoming her first and only chart single. It has since peaked at number thirty-seven.
Martin also recorded a version of the Olivia Newton-John song "Magic" for the Wizards of Waverly Place soundtrack. Martin has partnered with Build-A-Bear Workshop for their "Love.Hugs.Peace" movement. For the ad campaign, Martin recorded a special version of "Let's Talk About Love". Martin also recorded two songs in Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam, "Tear it Down" and "Walkin in My Shoes", alongside the Camp Rock co-star Matthew "Mdot" Finley. Martin also appear on the collaborative song "It's On", which features the co-stars of the film. All songs appear in the soundtrack of the film.
Martin appeared in the music video "Remember December" by Demi Lovato. Martin did not join the Jonas Brothers: Live in Concert tour, with Demi Lovato and the cast of Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam, because she was filming Mean Girls 2.
Martin became engaged to British actor Oli Higginson in May 2016.[4] They were married on September 24, 2016, in London, UK.[5]
Meaghan Martin on IMDb
