
Type Societas Europaea
ISIN DE0006452907
Industry Architecture, Engineering, Construction, Multimedia
Founded Munich, Germany (1963)
Headquarters Munich, Germany
Key people Patrik Heider[1] Viktor Várkonyi Jon Elliott Koen Matthijs
Revenue € 461 Mio. (2018)[2]
Net income € 47 million (2016)[3]
Number of employees 2.142 (2017)[4]
Website www.nemetschek.com
Nemetschek Group is a vendor of software for architects, engineers and the construction industry. The company develops and distributes solutions for designing, building and managing buildings and real estate as well as multimedia.
The company was founded by Prof. Georg Nemetschek in 1963 and went by the name of Ingenieurbüro für das Bauwesen (engineering firm for the construction industry), focusing on structural design. The engineering firm was one of the first companies in the industry to use computers and developed software for engineers, initially for its own requirements. In 1977 Nemetschek started distributing its program system Statik 97/77 for civil engineering.
At the Hanover Fair in 1980, Nemetschek presented a software package for the integrated calculation and design of standard components for solid construction. This was the first time that it was possible to use Computer-aided engineering (CAE) on microcomputers, and the product remained unique on the market for many years.
In 1981 Nemetschek Programmsystem GmbH was founded and was responsible for software distribution; Georg Nemetschek’s engineering firm continued to be in charge of program development. The main product, Allplan – a CAD system for architects and engineers, was launched in 1984. This allowed designers to model buildings in three dimensions. Nemetschek began to expand internationally in the 80s: in 1996 the company had subsidiaries in eight European countries and distribution partners in nine countries in Europe, and since 1992 has also had an additional development site in Bratislava, Slovakia. The first acquisitions were made at the end of the 90s, e.g. the structural design program vendor Friedrich + Lochner.
The company, operating as Nemetschek AG since 1994, went public in 1999 and has been listed in the Prime Standard market segment in Frankfurt ever since. A series of company takeovers were to follow, the largest acquisitions including the American Diehl Graphsoft (now Vectorworks) and MAXON Computer GmbH with its Cinema 4D software for visualization and animation. The next takeovers occurred in 2006 with the purchases of the Hungarian Graphisoft and the Belgian SCIA International.
In November 2013 Nemetschek acquired the MEP solutions provider Data Design System (DDS).[5] On 31 October 2014 the acquisition of Bluebeam Software, Inc. was concluded.[6] At the end of 2015 Solibri was acquired.[7] dRofus became a member of the Nemetschek Group at the beginning of 2017.
Among others, Nemetschek is a member of the BuildingSMART e.V. and the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Nachhaltiges Bauen (DGNB) (German Sustainable Building Council).
Since 2008 Nemetschek AG has been acting as a holding company with four business units: Design (Architecture and Civil Engineering), Building, Management and Multimedia. The holding company maintains 16 product brands.[8]
Allplan: Headquartered in Munich, Allplan was founded on January 1, 2008. It develops and distributes the Allplan product family. The company has 400 employees (2017).[9] Allplan is a platform software for architects, civil engineers, contractors and facility managers for designing and managing buildings, and is used throughout Europe.
Bluebeam, Inc.: Since 2002, Bluebeam has made desktop, mobile and cloud-based solutions for architects, engineers and construction professionals worldwide. Over 1 million users use Bluebeam software for project collaboration and digital construction document processing. The company has offices in California, Texas, Illinois, New Hampshire, Denmark, Germany, England and Sweden. (2018)[10]
Graphisoft: Graphisoft is an international vendor of architecture software ArchiCad" The company was founded in 1982 and now has more than 230 employees. The company is headquartered in Budapest and has international subsidiaries in the USA, Great Britain, Spain, Japan and Singapore. According to the company, ArchiCAD architecture software is used in more than 80 countries.[citation needed]
Vectorworks: Headquartered in Columbia, Maryland and employing around 160 people as of 2016, has been developing and distributing design software for more than 20 years. The Vectorworks product line offers professional design solutions for architecture, interior construction, the entertainment industry, landscaping, landscape architecture and mechanical engineering. According to the manufacturer, Vectorworks is used in 85 countries worldwide.
Data Design System: Data Design System AS (DDS) is one of Europe's largest vendors of Open BIM design and documentation tools for MEP (Mechanical, Electrical & Plumbing) professionals. DDS was founded in Norway in 1984.
Scia: Scia (whose name is an acronym for Scientific Applications) was founded in 1974 and has its headquarters in Herk-de-Stad, Belgium. It develops and distributes software for structural calculation, structural design and structural construction, focusing on Building information modeling. Scia is a 100%-owned subsidiary of Nemetschek SE and claims to employ a staff of more than 100 at ten sites worldwide.
Maxon: Headquartered in Friedrichsdorf, Germany, MAXON Computer is a developer of Cinema 4D, a software for visualization and animation.professional 3D modeling, painting, animation and rendering solutions. MAXON has offices in Germany, USA, United Kingdom, Canada, France, Japan and Singapore.
Comparison of CAD editors for architecture, engineering and construction (AEC)
Nemetschek SE website
