Aaryn Doyle

Born Aaryn Élan Doyle (1993-01-04) January 4, 1993 (age 27) Ontario, Canada
Occupation Actress, singer, rapper, songwriter, dancer, model, voice actress
Years active 1999 - present
Aaryn Élan Doyle (born January 4, 1993)[1] is a Canadian actress, singer, rapper, songwriter, dancer, model, and voice actress. She is best known for her role as Lola Scott in the Disney Channel Original Movie Camp Rock.[2] In 2008, Doyle was signed to the Ford Modeling Agency, but is currently represented by IBIS Talent Management. Doyle has represented brand lines such as Diesel and Nike, as seen in Camp Rock red carpet shots. According to media insiders, Doyle is to embark upon a new Marketing endeavour in business as well as in entertainment in 2015 with a full music media campaign in the works in order to take advantage of Doyle's vocal talents and songwriting capabilities.
Doyle is also the voice of Pansy in Miss Spider's Sunny Patch Friends and Foo in The Save-Ums.
Doyle started her career at the age of six while attending St. John Catholic School in Lincoln, following a win at Model Search America (MSA).[3]
Doyle has appeared in films, television shows, and commercials, and has also voiced many animation/voice-over projects. She was the lead female vocalist for a 12-piece Toronto band for 3 years from age 12 to 15, but later performed with other TO bands, and was a member of CTV's Canadian Idol choir ensemble in 2005. In the fall of 2007, Doyle joined the cast of Disney Channel original movie Camp Rock, with the Jonas Brothers and Demi Lovato and was released on June 20, 2008.[4]
Doyle was featured in the Camp Rock song "What It Takes", in addition to contributing vocals for the tracks "Our Time Is Here" and "We Rock" as the character Lola Scott. However, Doyle did not reprise her role in Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam.[citation needed]
Doyle appeared in the films Sins of the Father and Jasper, Texas. She is a cast member of the animated television series Miss Spider's Sunny Patch Kids with Brooke Shields, and Rick Moranis, before starring in Miss Spider's Sunny Patch Friends with Kristin Davis as Miss Spider. She also stars in the Emmy and Grammy award-winning and nominated animated series The Save-Ums, as well as Friends and Heroes and the animated short film/TV movie Tomboy.[citation needed]
Past years have seen Doyle recording with her youth trio for a CCC production company; their tracks can be heard on CTS. Between the ages of 10 and 12, she has recorded over 70 pop/gospel songs and has starred in CBC radio dramas.[citation needed]
In 2007, she appeared on an episode of Little Mosque on the Prairie as a teenage Muslim girl, followed by a guest starring role as a model on The Latest Buzz (season 3). In 2010, Doyle's vocal styling was used in the pilot episode of Life Unexpected, singing solo on the reproduced cover soundtrack of I Will Always Love You.[citation needed]
What It Takes
Our Time Is Here (with Demi Lovato & Meaghan Jette Martin)
We Rock (with the cast of Camp Rock)
I Will Always Love You (Pilot) TV episode 2010
Hi Ho Away We Go (The Prince, the Princess and the Bee) TV episode/special 2006
Do the Buggy Conga (The Thinking Stone/Big Bad Buggysitter) TV episode 2006
Have A Happy hatch Day (Bug Your Mom Day: A Cloudy Day in Sunny Patch) TV episode 2005
Faky Snaky Dance (Scary Scaly Tale: A Bug-A-Boo Day Play) TV episode 2004
La la la Ladybug (Ant-tuition: Sing It Sister) TV episode 2004
Aaryn Doyle on IMDb
Aaryn Doyle on MySpace
Aaryn Doyle on Instagram
Aaryn Doyle on Twitter
Aaryn Doyle on BlogSpot
