
Camp Rock is a 2008 Disney Channel Original Movie directed by Matthew Diamond and starring Demi Lovato, Joe Jonas, Meaghan Martin, Maria Canals-Barrera, Daniel Fathers, and Alyson Stoner. It is about Mitchie (Demi Lovato), a young girl aspiring to be a singer, and her time at Camp Rock, a summer music camp, where she will discover friends, adversaries, romance, and her voice.
The film debuted on the American Disney Channel on June 20, 2008. Camp Rock was the second DCOM to air on ABC's The Wonderful World of Disney after its premiere on Disney Channel and was placed on the iTunes Store for digital purchase shortly after its premiere. The film was watched by 8.9 million viewers on the night of its premiere and is currently the third highest viewed DCOM of all time, behind High School Musical 2 and Wizards of Waverly Place: The Movie.[1]
The film was followed by a sequel, Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam (2010).
Mitchie Torres (Demi Lovato) is a young musician aspiring to be a singer. Mitchie wants to go to a summer music camp named "Camp Rock". Since her family cannot afford the tuition, Mitchie's mother, Connie Torres (Maria Canals-Barrera), arranges to cater food for the camp, thus allowing Mitchie to attend. In return, Mitchie must help her mother out in the kitchen.
Meanwhile, Shane Gray (Joe Jonas), the spoiled and arrogant lead singer of the popular music trio Connect 3, has been assigned to be in charge of dance classes for one month at Camp Rock by his bandmates Nate Gray (Nick Jonas) and Jason Gray (Kevin Jonas) and is forced to record a song with the winner of Final Jam. Shane overhears Mitchie singing and falls in love with her voice, but Mitchie leaves before Shane can figure out it was her.
During Opening Jam, Mitchie learns that many of the campers have notable roots and is embarrassed that she was only able to come to the camp because of her mother's catering service. She convinces Tess Tyler (Meaghan Martin), a girl known for her famous mother and her popularity, and her friends, Peggy (Jasmine Richards) and Ella (Anna Maria Perez de Tagle), that her mother is the president of Hot Tunes TV China. Tess, impressed, invites Mitchie to bunk with her group.
When Mitchie overhears Shane's new song, she compliments him. Shane, doubtful that his record label and his fans would accept the song, begins to fall for Mitchie. In the cafeteria, Tess and Caitlyn begin to throw spaghetti at each other and Mitchie gets in the middle of the fight. Brown (Daniel Fathers), the owner of the camp, breaks the fight up, and Tess frames Caitlyn for the incident. Brown punishes Caitlyn by having her work in the kitchen and Mitchie, who is worried that Caitlyn will learn her secret, does not defend her.
When Mitchie accidentally enters the kitchen while Caitlyn is working, Caitlyn learns about Mitchie's secret. At Pajama Jam, Mitchie supports Caitlyn when Tess attempts to upstage her show. Mitchie and Caitlyn reconcile.
Shane spreads the word that he is searching for a girl with "the voice." When Tess sees Mitchie and Shane rowing together, she becomes jealous and, after finding out about Mitchie's secret, tells the entire camp. Shane says that Mitchie deceived him to get close to him just because he is famous.
Tess learns that Mitchie is the girl Shane is looking for. In order to get rid of Mitchie, on the eve of Final Jam, Tess frames Mitchie and Caitlyn for stealing her charm bracelet. Brown bans them from all camp activities until the end of Final Jam.
At Final Jam, Brown announces that the winner of Final Jam, as decided by the judges, Connect 3, will not only win a trophy, but a chance to record with Shane. Peggy and Ella lose their patience with Tess, stand up to her, and leave her group. Ella performs "Hasta La Vista" with Barron (Jordan Francis) and Sander (Roshon Fegan). Tess realizes her mom is attending and starts to perform "2 Stars", however she stumbles when her mom has to take a call during her performance. Peggy reveals her real name is Margaret Dupree and performs "Here I Am". Tess apologizes to Peggy and Ella. As Brown announces the end of Final Jam, the spotlights turn on, and he allows Mitchie to perform, saying he was hoping they would catch on: as their performance was not in the lineup and was technically after "the end of Final Jam". Mitchie starts to perform "This Is Me", Shane realizes Mitchie was the voice from before, and he soon joins in. Backstage, Tess tells Mitchie and Caitlyn she told Brown that they didn't steal her bracelet, and Mitchie and Shane reconcile. Peggy is announced as the winner of Final Jam. The entire camp sing "We Rock". Caitlyn shows Mitchie, Tess, Peggy, and Ella the recording studio she built in her garage, and they perform "Our Time Is Here".
Demi Lovato as Mitchie Torres, a young girl aspiring to be a singer.
Joe Jonas as Shane Gray, the spoiled and arrogant lead singer of the popular music trio Connect 3.
Meaghan Martin as Tess Tyler, a shallow and self-centered girl known as the "diva of Camp Rock".
Alyson Stoner as Caitlyn Gellar, a Camp Rock attendee whom Mitchie befriends.
Maria Canals-Barrera as Connie Torres, Mitchie's mother and Camp Rock's new cook.
Daniel Fathers as Brown Cessario, Camp Rock's camp director.
Julie Brown as Dee La Duke, Camp Rock's musical director.
Anna Maria Perez de Taglé as Ella Pador, a Camp Rock attendee and Tess's friend.
Jasmine Richards as Margaret "Peggy" Dupree, a Camp Rock attendee and Tess's friend.
Jordan Francis as Barron James, a Camp Rock attendee and rapper.
Roshon Fegan as Sander Loyer, a Camp Rock attendee and rapper.
Nick Jonas as Nate Gray, a member of the popular music trio Connect 3.
Kevin Jonas as Jason Gray, a member of the popular music trio Connect 3.
Aaryn Doyle as Lola Scott, a Camp Rock attendee and singer.
Giovanni Spina as Andy, a Camp Rock attendee and drummer.
Edward Jaunz as Steve Torres, Mitchie's father.
Jennifer Ricci as T.J. Tyler, Tess's mother and a famous singer.
Camp Rock was filmed in October 2007 at YMCA Camp Wanakita in Haliburton, Ontario, and Kilcoo Camp in Minden, Ontario.[2][3]
The Camp Rock soundtrack debuted at #3 on the Billboard 200 album charts, selling over 188,000 units in its first week. The album was certified Platinum by the RIAA and sold over 1,257,000 copies to date. In Brazil, the album was certified Platinum by the ABPD and sold over 60,000 copies until 2009.[4]
Camp Rock premiered on the Disney Channel on June 20, 2008, with 8.86 million viewers.[5] Its June 21 showing on ABC had 3.47 million viewers, and its June 22 showing on ABC Family had 3.73 million viewers.[5]
Its Disney Channel Italy premiere received 1.14 million viewers in September 2008.[6]
The DVD and Blu-ray release for the film, titled "Camp Rock: Extended Rock Star Edition", was released on August 19, 2008.[7] It was released in November in other countries. It was released on December 1, 2008, in the UK only on DVD.[8]
Both the DVD and Blu-ray release contain the following bonus features.
Extended ending
Sing-along and karaoke functions
"How to Be a Rock Star"
"Jonas Brothers: Real Life Rock Stars"
"Introducing Demi Lovato"
"Too Cool: Setting the Stage"
"Hasta La Vista: From Rehearsal to Final Jam""
Music videos
"Camp Memories" - a still gallery with video feature
There were some hidden bonus features throughout parts of the Camp Rock: Extended Rock Star Edition DVD.
"We Rock Crew Video" - the crew of Camp Rock dances to "We Rock".
"1234 Goodbye" - Demi Lovato performed her first song ("Who Will I Be?") the last day of filming, "1234 Goodbye".
According to the Camp Rock section of movieman'sguide, there is another easter egg, but it is possibly untrue. In their words, "...and a short easter egg in the Music Video part of the disc (keep pressing down until you see a Pink Guitar)".
Merchandise of the film is sold at Target, Claires, and Limited Too. They include clothing (such as pajamas, T-shirts, and underwear), bags (tote bags, backpacks, etc.), bedding collection, toys, and dolls of the characters. Play Along Toys, so far, has only released dolls of Mitchie and Shane. On May 13, 2008, Disney published Camp Rock: the Junior Novel, by Lucy Ruggles, the novelization of the film. Target retail stores sell "special editions" of the novel, hardcover books that include photos.
Camp Rock on IMDb
