
Type Privately held
Industry Information Technology
Founded 1998
Founder João Carreira (CEO), Gonçalo Quadros (Chairman), Diamantino Costa,
Headquarters Coimbra, Portugal
Products Xception, Beyond Logistics, Oversee, WOW, SMITEn
Revenue 45M€ (2018)
Number of employees 800+ (2018)
Website criticalsoftware.com
Critical Software is an international information systems and software company, headquartered in Coimbra, Portugal. The company was established in 1998, from the University of Coimbra's business incubator and technology transfer centre, Instituto Pedro Nunes (IPN). The company's headquarters are located in Coimbra, Portugal, with other offices in Porto and Lisbon (Portugal), Southampton (United Kingdom), Munich, (Germany) and California, (United States).
Critical Software provides systems and software services for safety, mission and business-critical applications in several markets, including aerospace, defense, automotive, railway, telecoms, finance, and energy & utilities. Core competencies include system planning and analysis, system design and development, embedded and real-time systems, command & control systems, security and infrastructure, systems integration, business intelligence, independent software verification & validation, digital transformation and smart meter testing.[citation needed]
Critical Software's delivery unit was the first in Portugal to be rated at CMMI Maturity Level 5. The company is one of a few dozen organizations in the world which have both waterfall and agile software development units rated at Maturity Level 5.[citation needed]
The Critical Group comprises a series of technology companies, many of which were formed from ideas and solutions[buzzword] originally developed within Critical Software.
Critical Materials develops products that provide diagnostics and prognostics for critical structural systems.
onCaring is a technology company addressing the needs of 20 million seniors living in long-term care across Europe, the United States, and Brazil.
Critical Links provides purpose-built solutions[buzzword] to simplify the delivery of digitised content to schools.
Coimbra Genomics is a company that develops solutions[buzzword] that aim to bridge the gap between genomic knowledge and medical practice.
Retmarker provides software solutions[buzzword] for the screening and progression monitoring of retinal diseases.
Critical Manufacturing provides automation and manufacturing software for high-tech industries. The company was acquired by ASMPT in 2018.
Watchful Software provided software solutions[buzzword] that kept sensitive information safe from disclosure or security breaches. Symantec acquired it in 2017.
Critical Ventures aims to partner with and invest in entrepreneurs developing innovative technologies with the potential to disrupt global markets.[citation needed]
Official site
Critical Software S.A., BusinessWeek
Achievements Small & Medium Sized Enterprises, European Space Agency
Critical Software Shows Portugal Can Grow, Forbes
Critical Software – Pioneers, Up Magazine
