Type Division
Industry Computer software Security software
Fate Acquired by IBM
Founded Atlanta, Georgia, U.S. (1994 (1994))
Founder Chris Klaus
Headquarters 6303 Barfield Road, Atlanta, Georgia, , U.S.
Area served Worldwide
Key people Ginni Rometty (Chairman, President, and CEO)
Services IBM Security Solutions
Parent IBM
Divisions IBM Security Solutions
Website IBM Internet Security Systems
IBM Internet Security Systems, formerly Internet Security Systems, and often known simply as ISS or ISSX (after its former NASDAQ ticker symbol) is a security software provider founded in 1994. The company was acquired by IBM in 2006. It provides an integrated solutions[buzzword] for computers, servers, networks, and remote locations that involve preemptive security against threats before they affect a business.[1]
In 1992, while attending the Georgia Institute of Technology, Christopher Klaus developed the first version of Internet Security Scanner. In 1994, Chris Klaus founded Internet Security Systems (ISS) to further develop and market Internet Security Scanner, which later became Internet Scanner. Although the larger shareholder, Chris Klaus took the role of chief technology officer, whilst Tom Noonan was recruited as chief executive officer in 1995. In 1996 David Strohm from Greylock Ventures and Bob Davoli, from Sigma Partners, led the first round of venture capital investment in ISS. In 1997, Ted Schlein from Kleiner Perkins and ATT Ventures invested in the next round. The initial public offering of the company on NASDAQ was on March 23, 1998.[2][3]
Further products in security software space followed, including Network Sensor and Server Sensor which were both developed in-house. In 1998, ISS acquired the UK company March Information Systems, and rebranded their Security Manager product as System Scanner. About the same time, ISS acquired the company DbSecure, founded by Eric Gonzales and Aaron C. Newman, to add a database security solution[buzzword] to their products. The DbSecure product was rebranded as Database Scanner. Subsequently, ISS acquired Network ICE and integrated their BlackICE technology into the ISS product range.[3]
In 2004 Chris Klaus stepped down from his role of Chief Technology Officer to pursue other interests, although he remained a significant shareholder and a role as the company's Chief Security Advisor. His role as Chief Technology Officer was taken by Chris Rouland.[4]
On 23 August 2006, IBM announced its intention to acquire Internet Security Systems for $1.36 billion and its Japanese subsidiary, ISS KK, for additional $570M. Total acquisition transaction size was $1.93 billion. On 16 October 2006, the deal was approved by ISS shareholders.[5]
By 2011, IBM has accumulated more than 10 security-related startups and these, including ISS, were integrated with the security intelligence software company Q1 Labs to form the Security Systems Division.[6] The new unit was headed by Brendan Hannigan, who was Q1 Labs' previous CEO.[7]
IBM has since discontinued ISS' signature product, the Proventia multifunction security appliance. This occurred after a long decline in tech support and licensing renewal service associated with the product.[8][9]
Current and former product families of ISS include:[10]
BlackICE
Internet Scanner[11]
Network Sensor[12]
Proventia
RealSecure
Secure Log Manager
Server Sensor
Site Protector
System Scanner
Currently supported products include:
Endpoint Secure Control
Enterprise Scanner
Internet Scanner
IBM Open Signatures
IBM Security Network Intrusion Prevention System (IPS)[13]
Proventia Desktop
Proventia Management SiteProtector[14]
Proventia Management SiteProtector Web Console
Proventia Network Mail Security
Proventia Network Multi-Function Security
Proventia Server Intrusion Prevention System for Linux[15]
Proventia Server Intrusion Prevention System for Windows
Proventia Web Application Security
Proventia Web Filter
Virtual Server Protection for VMWare[16]
IBM Internet Security Systems is headquartered in Sandy Springs, near Atlanta (Georgia, United States). Until late 2003 the company had significant development activities in Mountain View (California, United States), Reading (UK) and Sydney (Australia), but all development has since been relocated to Atlanta. The company also maintains sales offices worldwide.[17]
IBM Security Solutions providing support for IBM Internet Security Systems' products have support center offices worldwide[18]
Sandy Springs, near Atlanta (Georgia, United States) (where IBM Internet Security Systems is headquartered)
Brussels, Belgium
Brisbane, Australia
Tokyo, Japan
Bangalore, India
Hortolandia, Brazil
Southfield, Michigan, United States
Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Boulder, United States
Kraków, Poland
Heredia, Costa Rica
IBM Internet Security Systems corporate website
archive of technical papers and utilities for RealSecure
BlackIce Defender tiny, small, IDS / Firewall Giant
IBM Security App Uses Analytics To Target Internal Threats
