Keizō Obuchi
小渕 恵三
Keizō Obuchi

Prime Minister of Japan
In office 30 July 1998 – 5 April 2000
Monarch Akihito
Preceded by Ryutaro Hashimoto
Succeeded by Yoshiro Mori
Minister for Foreign Affairs
In office 11 September 1997 – 30 July 1998
Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto
Preceded by Yukihiko Ikeda
Succeeded by Masahiko Kōmura
Chief Cabinet Secretary
In office 6 November 1987 – 3 June 1989
Prime Minister Noboru Takeshita
Preceded by Masaharu Gotoda
Succeeded by Masajuro Shiokawa
Director General of the Prime Minister's Office
In office 9 November 1979 – 17 July 1980
Prime Minister Masayoshi Ōhira
Preceded by Asao Mihara
Succeeded by Taro Nakayama
Director General of the Okinawa Development Agency
In office 9 November 1979 – 17 July 1980
Prime Minister Masayoshi Ōhira
Preceded by Asao Mihara
Succeeded by Taro Nakayama
Member of the House of Representatives for Gunma 3rd District
In office 21 November 1963 – 14 May 2000

Personal details
Born (1937-06-25)25 June 1937 Nakanojō, Gunma, Japan
Died 14 May 2000(2000-05-14) (aged 62) Tokyo, Japan
Political party Liberal Democratic Party
Spouse(s) Chizuko Ono
Children Yūko Obuchi 1 son 1 daughter
Alma mater Waseda University
Keizō Obuchi (小渕 恵三, Obuchi Keizō, 25 June 1937 – 14 May 2000) was a Japanese politician who served as Prime Minister of Japan from 1998 to 2000, and was elected to the House of Representatives twelve times. His political career ended prematurely when, in early 2000, he suffered a serious, and ultimately fatal, stroke.
Obuchi was born in Nakanojō, Gunma Prefecture on June 25, 1937.[1] His father, Mitsuhei Obuchi, was one of four representatives in the Diet (parliament) for a district in Gunma, a rural prefecture.[2] At the age of 13, he transferred to a private middle school in Tokyo and lived in the city for the rest of his life. In 1958, he enrolled at Waseda University as an English literature major, in hopes of becoming a writer. When his father died that same year, he decided to follow in his footsteps, so he changed his major to political science and graduated with a bachelor of arts degree in 1962.
Between January and September 1963, he travelled to thirty-eight countries, completely circumnavigating the globe and taking odd jobs as he went, as he was short on money. These included being a dishwasher, an assistant aikido instructor and a TV camera crew assistant in Berlin which was the most physically demanding. While in the United States, he met Robert F. Kennedy by walking into the attorney general's office.
That November, inspired by his talk with Kennedy, he ran for the House of Representatives and was elected to a seat representing Gunma's 3rd district, making him the youngest legislator in Japanese history at 26 years of age. He served his first term in the Diet while pursuing graduate studies at Waseda.
In 1979, he became the director of the prime minister's office and director of the Okinawa Development Agency, his first cabinet post. He served there for eight years before becoming Chief Cabinet Secretary in 1987. Two years later, he formally announced the death of Emperor Showa. As Chief Cabinet Secretary, he was tasked in making the famous announcement of the new era name "Heisei" for the new Emperor Akihito.
In 1991, he became secretary general of the LDP, and in 1994 became its vice president. In 1997, Ryutaro Hashimoto appointed Obuchi as Minister of Foreign Affairs, where he shone in negotiations with Russia over Japanese claims in the Kuril Islands, as well as negotiations over the unification of Korea.
In 1998, Obuchi's time came when the LDP lost its majority in the House of Councillors. Hashimoto resigned as LDP president, and Obuchi was named his successor. When the time came for the Diet to designate a new Prime Minister, Obuchi became only the second LDP candidate not to win the support of the upper house. However, the Constitution of Japan stipulates that if the two chambers cannot agree on a choice for Prime Minister, the choice of the House of Representatives is deemed to be that of the Diet. With the LDP's large majority in the lower house, Obuchi was formally appointed Prime Minister on 30 July.
During his term, he was focused on two major issues: signing a peace treaty with Russia and reviving the Japanese economy. His solution to the latter was to increase public spending and lowering income taxes, which briefly slowed the recession but ultimately did very little to turn it around. One of his government actions was to give shopping coupons to 35 million citizens in the hope it would spark a consumer boom. His Russia policy also eluded implementation before his death.
Obuchi's fiscal policy focused on strengthening the core capital requirements for financial institutions while issuing more Japanese government bonds to finance public infrastructure, which boosted the rising Japanese public debt.[3]
Obuchi was known to have regularly enjoyed playing squash at the courts in the Canadian Embassy, in Tokyo`s Azabu. Squash players tend to be very fit, as it is excellent cardio-vascular exercise. This is at odds with his depiction in Japanese media as gakeppuchi Obuchi (崖っぷち小渕, Obuchi on the brink) which construed his physical health mirrored the precarious state of Japan's economy.
Obuchi suffered a stroke on 1 April 2000 and slipped into a coma at Tokyo's Juntendo University Hospital. When it became apparent he would never regain consciousness, he was replaced by Yoshirō Mori on 5 April. Obuchi died on 14 May at the age of 62; a state funeral was held in his honour at the Nippon Budokan on 8 June and was attended by foreign dignitaries from 156 countries and 22 organizations, includes about 25 heads of state. Notable presence at Obuchi’s funeral includes UN Secretary General Kofi Annan, United States President Bill Clinton and South Korea President Kim Dae-jung.
Obuchi married environmental essayist Chizuko Ono in 1967. They were introduced by Tomisaburo Hashimoto, a Diet member and relative of Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto. They had one son and two daughters. Their younger daughter, Yūko Obuchi, ran for and was elected to the former prime minister's Diet seat in the 2000 elections. Obuchi was a great fan of the works of the late historical novelist Ryōtarō Shiba, and a particular admirer of Sakamoto Ryōma, a key figure in the events leading to the Meiji Restoration.[clarification needed]
Obuchi also had the unusual hobby of collecting figures of oxen. It relates to the fact that he was born in the Year of the Ox, the second year of the Chinese zodiac. He started collecting the figures following his initial election to the Diet in 1963, and after three and a half decades, the collection numbered in the thousands. He was also devoted to aikido and enjoyed golf as well.
Medal of Honour with Yellow Ribbon for Best Father (1999)[4]
Grand Cordon of the Order of the Chrysanthemum (May 14, 2000; posthumous)[5]
Senior Second Rank (May 14, 2000; posthumous)[6]
Golden Pheasant Award of the Scout Association of Japan (1998)[7]
"Profile & Personality of Prime Minister Keizo Obuchi." Japanese Prime Minister's Office site (Japanese version)
Appearances on C-SPAN
