
Islington
Borough
Coat of arms Council logo
Islington shown within Greater London
Sovereign state United Kingdom
Constituent country England
Region London
Ceremonial county Greater London
Created 1 April 1965
Admin HQ Upper Street, Islington
Government
• Type London borough council
• Body Islington London Borough Council
• Leadership Leader & Cabinet (Labour)
• Mayor Cllr Dave Poyser
• London Assembly Jennette Arnold (Labour) AM for North East
• MPs Jeremy Corbyn (Labour) Emily Thornberry (Labour)
• EU Parliament London
Area
• Total 5.74 sq mi (14.86 km2)
Area rank 315th (of 317)
Population (mid-2018 est.)
• Total 239,142
• Rank 73rd (of 317)
• Density 42,000/sq mi (16,000/km2)
• Ethnicity[1] 47.7% White English 3.9% White Irish 0.1% White Gypsy or Irish Traveller 16.4% Other White 2.1% White & Black Caribbean 0.9% White & Black African 1.4% White & Asian 2.1% Other Mixed 1.7% Indian 0.5% Pakistani 2.3% Bangladeshi 2.2% Chinese 2.6% Other Asian 6.1% Black African 3.9% Black Caribbean 2.8% Other Black 0.9% Arab 2.4% Other
Time zone UTC (GMT)
• Summer (DST) UTC+1 (BST)
Postcodes EC, N, NW, WC
Area code(s) 020
ONS code 00AU
GSS code E09000019
Police Metropolitan Police
Website https://www.islington.gov.uk/
The London Borough of Islington (/ˈɪzlɪŋtən/ (listen) IZ-ling-tən) is a London borough in Inner London. The borough includes a significant area to the south which forms part of central London. Islington has an estimated population of 215,667. It was formed in 1965 by merging the former metropolitan boroughs of Islington and Finsbury.
The merged entity remains the second-smallest borough in London and the third-smallest district in England. The borough contains two Westminster parliamentary constituencies, Islington North, the constituency of Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn, and Islington South & Finsbury, the constituency of Labour Shadow Foreign Secretary and Shadow First Secretary of State Emily Thornberry. The local authority is Islington Council. The borough is home to football club Arsenal, one of the most successful clubs in England and its home Emirates Stadium is one of the largest football stadiums in the country.
The southern part of the borough, south of the A501 Pentonville Road and City Road, is part of central London and the central London congestion charging zone. A significant part of the southern section of the borough borders the City of London, with the area to the south west bordering the London Borough of Camden. The central London area includes a number of zone 1 stations including Farringdon and Old Street.
Islington was originally named by the Saxons Giseldone (1005), then Gislandune (1062). The name means 'Gīsla's hill' from the Old English personal name Gīsla and dun 'hill', 'down'. The name then later mutated to Isledon, which remained in use well into the 17th century when the modern form arose.[2] In medieval times, Islington was just one of many small manors in the area, along with Bernersbury, Neweton Berewe or Hey-bury, and Canonesbury (Barnsbury, Highbury and Canonbury – names first recorded in the 13th and 14th centuries). "Islington" came to be applied as the name for the parish covering these villages, and was the name chosen for the Metropolitan Borough of Islington, on its formation in 1899. On the merger with Finsbury, to form the modern borough this name came to be applied to the whole borough.
The borough includes the areas:
Angel
Archway
Barnsbury
Canonbury
Clerkenwell
Farringdon
Finsbury
Finsbury Park (split between three boroughs. Other boroughs are London Borough of Haringey and London Borough of Hackney).
Highbury
Highgate
Holloway
Islington
Kings Cross
Lower Holloway
Mildmay
Nag's Head
Newington Green
Old Street
Pentonville
St Luke's
Tufnell Park
Upper Holloway
Barnsbury
Bunhill
Caledonian
Canonbury
Clerkenwell
Finsbury Park
Highbury East
Highbury West
Hillrise
Holloway
Junction
Mildmay
Saint George's
Saint Mary's
Saint Peter's
Tollington
Islington Council is the borough's local authority. It is a London borough council, one of thirty-two principal subdivisions of the administrative area of Greater London. The council was created by the London Government Act 1963 and replaced two local authorities: Finsbury Metropolitan Borough Council and Islington Metropolitan Borough Council. The former Islington Metropolitan Town Hall, at the intersection of Upper Street and Richmond Grove, serves as the present Borough's council building.[3]
Islington is divided into 16 wards, each electing three councillors.[4] Following the May 2018 election, Islington Council comprises 47 Labour Party councillors and 1 Green Party councillor. Of these 48 councillors, the Leader of the Council is Councillor Richard Watts, while the Mayor is Councillor Dave Poyser.[5][6]
Islington is represented by two parliamentary constituencies. Islington North is represented by Jeremy Corbyn of the Labour Party, the current Leader of the Opposition since 2015. Islington South and Finsbury is represented by Emily Thornberry, Shadow First Secretary of State and Shadow Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the Labour Party.
Islington forms part of the North East constituency for the London Assembly, represented by Jennette Arnold, also of the Labour Party.
Inmarsat has its head office in the borough.[7]
There is one prison in Islington, a men's prison, HM Prison Pentonville. Until it closed in 2016 there was also a women's prison HM Prison Holloway, which in the early 20th century was used to hold many suffragettes.
The Borough boasts a large transport network for rail, bus, cycles and road users.
There are ten London Underground stations in the borough across London fare zones 1, 2 and 3. These stations are principally served by the Northern, Piccadilly and Victoria lines, although the Circle, Hammersmith & City and Metropolitan lines also pass through the Borough:
Angel
Archway
Arsenal
Caledonian Road
Farringdon (future: )
Finsbury Park
Highbury & Islington
Holloway Road
Old Street
Tufnell Park
The Piccadilly line carries passengers to key London destinations, including the West End and Heathrow Airport (). The Northern and Victoria lines also link the Borough to the West End, whilst the Northern line (Bank Branch) also passes through the City of London.
Just beyond the Borough's borders are King's Cross St Pancras (in the London Borough of Camden) and Moorgate (in the City).
There are also several London Overground stations in the borough, all of which are in London fare zone 2:
Caledonian Road & Barnsbury
Canonbury
Crouch Hill
Highbury & Islington
Upper Holloway
There are several other National Rail stations in Islington, which offer direct services to destinations across London, East Anglia and South East England:
Drayton Park
Essex Road
Farringdon (future: )
Finsbury Park
Highbury & Islington
Old Street
Farringdon and Finsbury Park are served by Thameslink services, with some trains travelling direct to Gatwick Airport (), as well as destinations including Cambridge, Peterborough, Brighton and Sevenoaks. Other stations, including Finsbury Park, are served by Great Northern trains which normally operate between Moorgate and Welwyn Garden City.
Crossrail (Elizabeth line) will pass through Farringdon once opened.
Moorgate lies just to the south of the Borough, in the City of London, whilst King's Cross lies to the Borough's immediate west, with destinations including Sheffield, Leeds, Newcastle, Edinburgh and Inverness.
In March 2011, the main forms of transport that residents used to travel to work were: underground, metro, light rail, tram, 19.4% of all residents aged 16–74; bus, minibus or coach, 10.3%; on foot, 10.3%; bicycle, 6.2%; driving a car or van, 6.0%; train, 3.7%; work mainly at or from home, 3.6%.[8]
Almeida Theatre
Artillery Ground
Pleasance Islington Theatre
Courtyard Theatre
Emirates Stadium (and the former Arsenal Stadium at Highbury)
Angel Central (formerly the Islington N1 Centre)
The Estorick Collection of Modern Italian Art in Canonbury Square
Hen and Chickens Theatre
Islington Arts Factory, in Parkhurst Road,
London Canal Museum, located in New Wharf Road, King's Cross
Islington Museum, located at Finsbury Library
Islington Local History Centre, located at Finsbury Library
John Salt, cocktail bar on Upper Street
The King's Head Theatre
Sadler's Wells Theatre
Union Chapel
Peter Benenson House, headquarters of Amnesty International
Little Angel Theatre a puppet theatre and producer of the Suspense Puppetry Festival of London.
VUE Cinema, located inside the N1 center
Odeon Cinema, located on Holloway Road
St John's Gate, Clerkenwell (Islington's badge for London2012)
The Screen On The Green, a single screen cinema on Upper Street
Holloway in Islington is home to Freightliners City Farm which is one of the many city farms throughout London. The farm contains a wide range of animals from rabbits to cows to chickens and pigs all free for the public to view.
In 1801, the civil parishes that form the modern borough had a total population of 65,721. This rose steadily throughout the 19th century, as the district became built up; exceeding 200,000 in the middle of the century. When the railways arrived the rate of population growth increased—reaching nearly 400,000 by the turn of the century; with the Metropolitan Borough of Finsbury particularly suffering deprivation, poverty and severe overcrowding. The increase in population peaked before World War I, falling slowly in the aftermath until World War II began an exodus from London towards the new towns under the Abercrombie Plan for London (1944). The decline in population reversed in the 1980s, but it remains below its 1971 level.
According to the 2001 census Islington had a population of 175,797. It was 75% White, including 5% White Irish, 6% Black African, 5% Black Caribbean and 2% Bangladeshi. Thirty-two per cent of the borough's residents were owner–occupiers.
According to the 2011 census, Islington has the highest population density of local authorities in England and Wales—13,875 people per square kilometre.[9]
Islington has the second highest proportion of Irish people in the country, behind London Borough of Brent.[10]
A 2017 study by Trust for London and the New Policy Institute found that a third of Islington residents live in poverty. This is above the London average of 27%. It also found that just 14% of local employees are in jobs which pay below the London Living Wage - which is the 4th lowest figure of any London borough.[11]
The following table shows the ethnic group of respondents in the 2001 and 2011 census in Islington.
The London Borough of Islington is home to two higher education institutions:
City, University of London at Northampton Square, formerly The City University, founded in 1894 as the Northampton Institute; and
London Metropolitan University, North Campus on the Holloway Road, formed from the merger of the University of North London and London Guildhall University in 2002. The University of North London was founded on this site in 1896 as the Northern Polytechnic Institute.
Moorfields Eye Hospital is a major centre for postgraduate training of ophthalmologists, orthoptists, optometrists, and nurses.
The borough also currently contains two colleges of further education:
City and Islington College; and
Westminster Kingsway College (while major improvement works are carried out at King's Cross).
There are two performing arts colleges. The Urdang Academy and the Musical Theatre Academy are both based in Islington.
The borough currently maintains 47 primary schools, 10 secondary schools, three special schools and five Pupil Referral Units. In 2000, Cambridge Education Associates, a private firm, took over the management of the Islington's state schools from the local education authority.[14]
The following people and military units have received the Freedom of the Borough of Islington.
Arsène Wenger OBE: 2004. [15]
The Honourable Artillery Company: October 2009[16]
The Islington Veterans' Association: March 2015.[17]
The Islington and Holloway Fire Stations of the London Fire Brigade: March 2018.[18]

List of people from the London Borough of Islington
Arsenal F.C.
Emirates Stadium
Finsbury Town Hall
Islington Links
Islington Council
Weather forecast for Islington
Islington Museum and Local History Centre
Coordinates: 51°32′N 0°08′W﻿ / ﻿51.533°N 0.133°W﻿ / 51.533; -0.133
