Type Private
Industry Technology, Software as a service
Founded 2004
Headquarters Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada
Area served Worldwide
Key people Ken Simpson, CEO Mike Smith, VP of Product Desmond Liao, Director of Marketing Sridhar Kakkillaya, Director of Operations
Products Spam Filtering, Anti-spam
Brands Inbound Filtering Outbound Filtering Transparent Filtering
Services Computer Security
Website www.mailchannels.com
MailChannels is a privately held, anti-spam technology company based in Vancouver, British Columbia.
MailChannels specializes in software and services that detect and block the sending of spam, phishing and other abusive email. Unlike most anti-spam technology providers, MailChannels positions itself as a leader in blocking abusive email at its source by installing software and services within sending networks and services such as ISPs and web hosting providers.
To combat outgoing spam, MailChannels offers customers either a cloud-based SMTP relay service, or software that is installed by the customer within their network. MailChannels' software derives from the open-source web proxy software Nginx,[1] and as such, the company makes the claim that its software is extremely scalable and robust.[2]
MailChannels' customers include large web hosting companies, internet service providers, mailbox providers and email service providers such as Endurance International Group, SendGrid, Sherweb, and Locaweb.
The company was founded in 2004 by former engineers of ActiveState (acquired by Sophos), who created one of the first commercial spam filters.
The company's first product was an SMTP proxy that provides tar-pitting and transparent SMTP proxy functionality for inbound email filtering. At the 2007 MIT Spam Conference,[3] the company's founder, Ken Simpson, was awarded the "best paper" award.
In 2007, MailChannels joined MAAWG and closed a series A round led by current and former Microsoft employees.
In 2010, the company launched an outbound email filtering software that claims to be capable of filtering up to 30 million messages per hour, transparently in the network. Outbound email filtering involves scanning email traffic as it exits the network, identifying compromised accounts, and reducing the risk of having IP addresses blocked by receiving networks.
In 2013, the company launched an outbound spam filtering service.
In 2016, the company launched a reseller program.
In 2018, the company launch an inbound spam filtering service.
E-mail spam
Mail transport agent
Outbound spam protection
Tarpit (networking)
MailChannels
Web Host Industry Review: MailChannels Provides Outbound Spam Filter to Web Host VPS.NET
Washington Post: Technology Aims to Bore Impatient Spammers
Network World: Tarpits deter impatient spammers
The Register: Spam: It sucks like a tarpit
O'Reilly Radar: Spamonomics 101
OnLAMP: Developing High Performance Asynchronous IO Applications
Case study on using Mail Channels within the hosting industry
