Setagaya 世田谷区
Special ward
City of Setagaya
Komazawa Olympic Park
Flag
Location of Setagaya in Tokyo
Setagaya Location in Japan
Coordinates: 35°38′47.66″N 139°39′11.69″E﻿ / ﻿35.6465722°N 139.6532472°E﻿ / 35.6465722; 139.6532472Coordinates: 35°38′47.66″N 139°39′11.69″E﻿ / ﻿35.6465722°N 139.6532472°E﻿ / 35.6465722; 139.6532472
Country Japan
Region Kantō
Prefecture Tokyo
Government
• Mayor Nobuto Hosaka (since May 2011)
Area
• Total 58.08 km2 (22.42 sq mi)
Population (March 1, 2018)
• Total 900,095
• Density 15,497.50/km2 (40,138.3/sq mi)
Symbols
• Tree Zelkova serrata
• Flower Habenaria radiata
• Bird Azure-winged magpie
Time zone UTC+9 (JST)
Postal code(s) 154 to 158 (First three digits)
Area code(s) 03
Website www.city.setagaya.lg.jp
Setagaya (世田谷区, Setagaya-ku) is a special ward in Tokyo, Japan. It is also the name of a neighborhood and administrative district within the ward. The ward calls itself Setagaya City in English.[1] Its official bird is the azure-winged magpie, its flower the fringed orchid, and its tree the Zelkova serrata.
Setagaya has the largest population and second largest area (after Ōta) of Tokyo's special wards. As of March 1, 2018, the ward has an estimated population of 900,095, and a population density of 15,497.50 persons per km2 with the total area of 58.08 km2.
Setagaya is located at the southwestern corner of the Tokyo's special wards and Tama River separates the boundary between Tokyo Metropolis and Kanagawa Prefecture.
Residential population is among the highest in Tokyo as there are many residential neighbourhoods within Setagaya. Setagaya is served by various rail services providing frequent 2 to 3 minutes headway rush hour services to the busiest train terminals of Shinjuku and Shibuya as well as through service trains which continue travelling on to the Tokyo Metro lines providing direct access to the central commercial and business districts. Most rail lines run parallel from east to west and there are no north to south rail services within Setagaya, except for Setagaya Line light rail.
The ward is divided into five districts. These are Setagaya, Kitazawa, Tamagawa, Kinuta and Karasuyama. The main ward office and municipal assembly (city hall) is located in Setagaya District, but other districts also have its own branch ward offices as a part of the administrative structure. Each branch offices provide almost identical services as the main office, but does not provide the services related to municipal assembly.
Most of the land is in the Musashino Tableland. The parts along the Tama River to the south are comparatively low-lying.
The special ward of Setagaya was founded on March 15, 1947.[citation needed]
During the Edo period, 42 villages occupied the area. With the abolition of the han system in 1871, the central and eastern portions became part of Tokyo Prefecture while the rest became part of Kanagawa Prefecture; in 1893, some areas were transferred to Tokyo Prefecture. With the establishment of Setagaya Ward (an ordinary ward) in the old Tokyo City in 1932, and further consolidation in 1936, Setagaya took its present boundaries.
During the 1964 Summer Olympics, the district of Karasuyama-machi in Setagaya was part of the athletics marathon and 50 km walk event.[2]
Carrot Tower
Gōtoku-ji [ja], a temple with the grave of Ii Naosuke, assassinated outside the Sakurada Gate of Edo Castle
Hanegi Park
Hasegawa Machiko Art Museum
Kinuta Park
Komazawa Olympic Park
NHK Science & Technology Research Laboratories
Oya Soichi Bunko
St. Mary's International School
Sakura-shinmachi
Seikadō Bunko Art Museum
Seisen International School
Setagaya Art Museum
Setagaya Business Square (SBS)
Setagaya Castle ruins
Setagaya Literary Museum
Tamagawadai Park
Zenyōmitsu-ji
Hachiman'yama
Kamikitazawa
Kamisoshigaya
Kitakarasuyama
Kasuya
Kyūden
Minamikarasuyama
Chitosedai
Funabashi
Kamata
Kinuta
Kinutakōen
Kitami
Okamoto
Ōkura
Seijō
Soshigaya
Unane
Akatsutsumi
Daita
Daizawa
Gōtokuji
Hanegi
Ikejiria
Kitazawa
Matsubara
Ōhara
Sakurajōsui
Umegaoka
Meidaimae
Shimokitazawa
Geba
Ikejirib
Kamiuma
Komazawac
Kyōdō
Mishuku
Miyasaka
Nozawa
Sakura
Sakuragaoka
Sangendjaya
Setagaya
Taishidō
Tsurumaki
Wakabayashi
Fukazawa
Higashitamagawa
Kaminoge
Kamiyōga
Komazawad
Komazawakōen
Nakamachi
Noge
Okusawa
Oyamadai
Sakurashinmachi
Seta
Shinmachi
Tamadzutsumi
Tamagawa
Tamagawadai
Tamagawaden'enchōfu
Todoroki
Yōga
Futako-Tamagawae
Notes:
a - 4-chome [33-ban to 39-ban] b - 1, 2, 3-chome, 4-chome [1-ban to 32-ban] c - 1, 2-chōme d - 3, 4-chōme e - Major commercial and residential district located by the Tama River
Keio Corporation Keiō Line: Daitabashi, Meidai-mae, Shimo Takaido, Sakura Josui, Kami Kitazawa, Hachiman Yama, Roka Koen, Chitose-Karasuyama Stations Keio Inokashira Line: Ikenoue, Shimo-Kitazawa, Shindaita, Higashi-Matsubara, Meidaimae Stations
Keiō Line: Daitabashi, Meidai-mae, Shimo Takaido, Sakura Josui, Kami Kitazawa, Hachiman Yama, Roka Koen, Chitose-Karasuyama Stations
Keio Inokashira Line: Ikenoue, Shimo-Kitazawa, Shindaita, Higashi-Matsubara, Meidaimae Stations
Odakyu Electric Railway Odawara Line: Higashi-Kitazawa, Shimo-Kitazawa, Setagaya-Daita, Umegaoka, Gōtokuji, Kyōdō, Chitose-Funabashi, Soshigaya-Ōkura, Seijōgakuen-Mae, Kitami Stations
Odawara Line: Higashi-Kitazawa, Shimo-Kitazawa, Setagaya-Daita, Umegaoka, Gōtokuji, Kyōdō, Chitose-Funabashi, Soshigaya-Ōkura, Seijōgakuen-Mae, Kitami Stations
Tokyu Corporation Den-en-toshi Line: Ikejiri Ohashi, Sangen-Jaya, Komazawa Daigaku, Sakura Shinmachi, Yōga, Futako-Tamagawa Stations Meguro Line: Okusawa Station Oimachi Line: Midorigaoka, (Jiyūgaoka), Kuhon-butsu, Oyamadai, Todoroki, Kaminoge, Futako-Tamagawa Stations Setagaya Line (LRT): Sangen-Jaya, Nishi Taishido, Wakabayashi, Shoin Jinja-mae, Setagaya, Kami Machi, Miyanosaka, Yamashita, Matsubara, Shimo Takaido Stations Toyoko Line: (Jiyūgaoka Station)
Den-en-toshi Line: Ikejiri Ohashi, Sangen-Jaya, Komazawa Daigaku, Sakura Shinmachi, Yōga, Futako-Tamagawa Stations
Meguro Line: Okusawa Station
Oimachi Line: Midorigaoka, (Jiyūgaoka), Kuhon-butsu, Oyamadai, Todoroki, Kaminoge, Futako-Tamagawa Stations
Setagaya Line (LRT): Sangen-Jaya, Nishi Taishido, Wakabayashi, Shoin Jinja-mae, Setagaya, Kami Machi, Miyanosaka, Yamashita, Matsubara, Shimo Takaido Stations
Toyoko Line: (Jiyūgaoka Station)
Chūō Expressway
Daisan Keihin Road (part of National Route 466)
Shuto Expressway No. 3 Shibuya Route No. 4 Shinjuku Route
No. 3 Shibuya Route
No. 4 Shinjuku Route
Tomei Expressway
National Route 20
National Route 246
National Route 466
On April 25, 2011, amid national concern over the safety of nuclear power triggered by the March 11 earthquake and Fukushima I nuclear accidents, former Social Democratic Party Upper House House of Councillors legislator Nobuto Hosaka was elected mayor on an anti-nuclear platform.[3] Prior to becoming mayor, Hosaka was also well known for his staunch opposition of the death penalty[4] and his defense of Japan's Otaku culture.[5]
Cookie Jar Entertainment had its Japan offices in Setagaya.[6]
Game Freak has its Japan offices in Setagaya.
Ivan Ramen restaurant: a ramen shop owned by an American chef.
OLM, Inc. has its studios in Setagaya.[7]
Toho has studio facilities in Setagaya.
Universities and colleges with campuses in Setagaya include:
Showa Women's University
Komazawa University
Nihon University
Nippon Sport Science University
Kokushikan University
Sanno Institute of Management
Tokyo City University
Tokyo University of Agriculture
Central Theological College, Tokyo
Setagaya operates public elementary and junior high schools. The Tokyo Metropolitan Government Board of Education operates public high schools.
Former international schools:
Tokyo No. 8 Korean Elementary School (東京朝鮮第八初級学校) - North Korean school[10]
Setagaya has sister-city relationships with Winnipeg, Manitoba in Canada; the Döbling district of Vienna, Austria; and Bunbury, Western Australia.
Setagaya family murder
Setagaya City Official Website (in Japanese)
