
Shreyas Talpade
Talpade at his latest photoshoot
Born (1976-01-27) 27 January 1976 (age 43) Bombay, Maharashtra, India (present-day Mumbai)
Nationality Indian
Education Mithibai College
Years active 2000-present
Spouse(s) Deepti Talpade
Children 1
Relatives Jayshree T. (Aunt) Meena T. (Aunt)
Shreyas Talpade (born 27 January 1976) is an Indian actor who appears in Marathi and Hindi films. He has appeared in several critically and commercially successful films including the reincarnation melodrama Om Shanti Om (2007) and the comedies Golmaal Returns (2008), Golmaal 3 (2010), Housefull 2 (2012) and Golmaal Again (2017).
Talpade was born in Mumbai, Maharashtra on 27 January 1976.[1] He attended Shree Ram Welfare Society High School in Andheri-West. And then he attended Mithibai College in Vile Parle. He is married to Deepti Talpade, a psychiatrist.[2] Shreyas met his wife Deepti when he went to her college as a celebrity[3] (he was doing the serial Aabhal Maya then). She was the general secretary. His aunts Jayshree T. and Meena T. are former Bollywood actresses.
Talpade began his acting career appearing in Marathi soap operas and doing stage shows across Maharashtra. He also appeared in the Zee TV soap opera Woh (1997) in which he was the main lead. He has also acted in mini-serials for the production "Adhikari Brothers". His role, in a very popular Marathi serial Damini, as the character Tejas was very popular among Marathi audiences. He also appeared in Jaane Anjaane (2001) aired on doordarshan where he played the role of a son who had dislikes for his father because he felt that his father was the reason for his accident.Viewers liked the content of the same.Fame arrived after he made his Bollywood debut in Nagesh Kukunoor's Iqbal which was written by Vipul K Rawal[4] in which he played the role of a deaf & mute youngster aspiring to be a cricketer.[5] The film and his performance were well received by both audiences and critics.[6] His next film was Kukunoor's Dor in which he played the comic role of a behroopiya, a man with many disguises. This film was also well received by critics.[7]
In 2006, he starred in the comedy, Apna Sapna Money Money and in 2007, he starred in Farah Khan's blockbuster movie, Om Shanti Om, with Shah Rukh Khan, where he played the role of Pappu Master. In 2008, he was seen in Kukunoor's cross-cultural comedy film, Bombay To Bangkok. He also produced a Marathi film, Sanai Chaughade, which was released the same year. His most recent movies are Shyam Benegal's Welcome to Sajjanpur, along with Golmaal Returns and Sangeeth Sivan's horror flick, Click. Shreyas was also seen in the horror film, Help. Shreyas next appeared in the movie Will You Marry Me? which released in 2012.[8][9]
Shreyas has produced a Marathi film, titled Poshter Boyz, under his home production banner, Affluence Movies.[10] The movie which released on 1 August 2014 was launched by Bollywood veteran Subhash Ghai.[11] The film is directed by Sameer Patil and the music for it is composed by Lesle Lewis.
The Marathi film Poshter Boyz was remade in Hindi as Poster Boys and Shreyas made his directorial debut with this film which released on 8 September 2017.[12] The film stars Shreyas himself along with Sunny Deol and Bobby Deol.
Aabhalmaya (Season #1) as a Nishant.
Damini as Tejas.
Avantika as Abhishek Jhagirdaar.
Bedhund Manachi Lehar
Gubbare
Amanat as Bala's husband / beggar
Tumcha Amcha Same Asta (Producer)
Woh as Ashutosh (Younger role)
Partners Trouble Ho Gayi Double (Himself)
The Great Indian Laughter Challenge (judge)
My Name Ijj Lakhan (Lakhan) in SAB TV
2005: Nominated Filmfare Best Male Debut Award for Iqbal
2006: Won Zee Cine Critics Award - Best Actor for Iqbal
2007: Won Star Screen Award Best Comedian for Dor
2008: Won Stardust Breakthrough Performance Award (Male) for Om Shanti Om
2008: Nominated Filmfare Best Supporting Actor Award for Om Shanti Om
In a series of sting operations carried out by Cobrapost code-named Operation Karaoke, Shreyas Talpade has been named as one of many celebrities who can be seen agreeing to promote the agenda of parties on social media platforms in exchange for money, on camera. [13]
Shreyas Talpade on IMDb
Shreyas Talpade at Total Bollywood
Shreyas Talpade on Instagram
