Wanderer, Wanderers, or The Wanderer may refer to:
Nomadic and/or itinerant people, working short-term before moving to other locations, who wander from place to place with no permanent home, or are vagrant
The Wanderer, an alternate name for the Wandering Jew
The Wanderer (Burney novel), by Frances Burney
The Wanderer (Creech novel), 2000 novel by Sharon Creech
The Wanderer (Edwards novel), a 1953 children's novel by Monica Edwards
The Wanderer (Leiber novel), 1964
The Wanderers (Price novel), a 1974 novel by Richard Price
The Wanderers (Rimland novel), a 1977 novel by Ingrid Rimland
The Wanderers (Shishkov novel), a 1931 novel by Vyacheslav Shishkov
The Wanderer (Gibran book), a book by Kahlil Gibran
The Wanderer (Waltari novel), a 1949 novel by Mika Waltari
The Wanderer or Le Grand Meaulnes, a 1913 novel by Alain-Fournier
The Wanderers, a 2017 novel by Meg Howrey
Wanderer, a 1985 science fiction novel by Dennis Schmidt
"The Wanderer" (Old English poem), an Old English poem
"The Wanderer", a 1726 poem by Richard Savage
"The Wanderer" (Maykov poem), a poem by Apollon Maykov published in 1867
"The Wanderer", a poem by John Masefield (1878–1967)
"The Wanderer", a 1913 poem by Christopher Brennan
"The Wanderer", a 1921 poem by Henry Lane Eno
Wanderers (comics), a DC Comics publication
The Wanderer (manga), by Narumi Kakinouchi
The Wanderer (Massachusetts newspaper), a weekly newspaper in southeastern Massachusetts
The Wanderer (Roman Catholic newspaper), a Catholic national weekly based in Minnesota
The Wanderer (1913 film), silent film
The Wanderer (1925 film), silent film directed by Raoul Walsh, starring Greta Nissen and Wallace Beery
The Wanderers (1956 film), a 1956 Italian drama film directed by Hugo Fregonese and starring Peter Ustinov
The Wanderer (1967 film), French film
The Wanderers (1973 film)
The Wanderers (1979 film), film directed by Philip Kaufman
Wanderers (2014 film), a 2014 Swedish science fiction short film directed by Erik Wernquist
The Wanderer (TV series), a 1994 British television series starring Bryan Brown
The Wanderer (audio drama), 2012
The Wanderer, a character in Canadian television series Lost Girl
Wanderer, a male mallard duck who was Greenie's father in Leafie, A Hen into the Wild
The Wanderer (Holy Blood album), 2002
The Wanderer (O.A.R. album), 1997
The Wanderer (Kevin Rowland album), 1988
The Wanderer (Donna Summer album), 1980
The Wanderer, a 2001 album by Karunesh
Wanderer, a 2011 Celtic relaxing album by Adrian von Ziegler
Wanderer (Heaven Shall Burn album), 2016
Wanderer (Cat Power album), 2018
Der Wanderer (D 489), an 1816 song by Franz Schubert
"Der Wanderer", a song by Robert Schumann
"Der Wanderer", a song by Pascal Dusapin based on a poem by Friedrich Nietzsche
"Der Wanderer", a song by Anselm Hüttenbrenner
"Der Wanderer", pour choeur d'hommes et piano, by Philippe Hersant
Wanderer Fantasy, a fantasy for piano by Franz Schubert
The Wanderer, the god Wotan in Wagner's opera Siegfried
"The Wanderer" or "Po dikim stepyam Zabaikalya", a Russian folk song
The Wanderer, a 2005 piece for a cappella voices by Ezequiel Viñao
The Wanderer, Russian song by Modest Mussorgsky
The Wanderer, song by Cecil Armstrong Gibbs
"The Wanderer" (Dion song), a 1961 song by Dion covered by many other artists
"The Wanderer" (Donna Summer song), a 1980 song on the album above
"The Wanderer" (U2 song), a 1993 song by U2 with lead vocals by Johnny Cash
"The Wanderer", song by Emperor from their 1997 album Anthems to the Welkin at Dusk
"Wanderer", 2007 song by the band Ensiferum on the album Victory Songs Song
"Wanderer", a song from the 2016 album Jomsviking by Amon Amarth
"The Happy Wanderer", the English title of a post-World War II German song
HMS Wanderer, several ships of the British Royal Navy
USS Wanderer, several United States Navy ships
Wanderer (sailing dinghy), a 14-foot sailing dinghy designed by Ian Proctor
Wanderer (slave ship), a ship that illegally carried more than 500 slaves from the Congo and Angola to Savannah, Georgia in 1858
Pearson Wanderer, a 30-foot sailboat designed by Bill Shaw
Wanderer (1878), a steam yacht which later became HMS Sealark
Wanderer (1879), the last whaling ship built in Mattapoisett, Massachusetts, for which The Wanderer (Massachusetts newspaper) was named
Wanderer (1891), a four-masted steel barque which inspired John Masefield's poem of the same name
Wanderer (1893), a San Francisco pilot boat bought by Sterling Hayden and used for his voyage to Tahiti
Wanderer, a 16-foot Wayfarer dinghy sailed by travel writer Frank Dye
Old Wanderers, a cricket ground in Johannesburg, South Africa
Wanderers Cricket Ground Windhoek, Namibia
Wanderers Grounds, a playing ground in Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada
Wanderers Stadium, a cricket ground in Johannesburg, South Africa
Sharjah Wanderers, a sports club and grounds in Sharjah, United Arab Emirates
Wanderers Football Club, Marrara, Northern Territory
Western Sydney Wanderers FC,
Western Sydney Wanderers FC (W-League)
Ajax Wanderers R.U.F.C.
Castaway Wanderers RFC
Wanderers Amateur Athletic Club
HFX Wanderers FC
Montreal Wanderers
Montreal Wanderers RFC
Wanderers F.C. (rugby union), a rugby union club based in Dublin
Ballyboden Wanderers GAA
Bray Wanderers F.C.
Pembroke Wanderers Hockey Club
Wexford Wanderers RFC
Cashmere Wanderers
Hamilton Wanderers AFC
Havelock North Wanderers AFC
Wanderers F.C., an English football club, the first winners of the FA Cup
Birkenhead Wanderers FC (rugby league)
Bolton Wanderers F.C.
Burton Wanderers F.C.
Burton Park Wanderers F.C.
Cray Wanderers F.C.
Dorking Wanderers F.C.
Ipswich Wanderers F.C.
Moseley Wanderers
Old Hill Wanderers F.C.
Public School Wanderers
Shropshire Wanderers F.C.
Sudbury Wanderers F.C.
Warstones Wanderers F.C.
Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C.
Wolverhampton Wanderers W.F.C.
Woolpack Wanderers F.C.
Wycombe Wanderers F.C.
Aberdeen Wanderers RFC
Dundee Wanderers F.C.
Forth Wanderers F.C.
Greenock Wanderers RFC
Murrayfield Wanderers RFC
Nithsdale Wanderers F.C.
St Cuthbert Wanderers F.C.
Glamorgan Wanderers RFC
Llanelli Wanderers RFC
Brooklyn Wanderers
Grafton Wanderers
Hartford Wanderers RFC
African Wanderers F.C., South Africa
Arsenal Wanderers, Mauritius
Manzini Wanderers F.C., Swaziland
Mighty Wanderers FC, Malawi
Mufulira Wanderers F.C., Zambia
Montevideo Wanderers F.C., Uruguay
Santiago Wanderers, Chile
Scottish Wanderers Football Club, Brazil
Wanderers Cricket Club, a cricket club in Barbados
NS Wanderers RC, Malaysia
S.K. Victoria Wanderers F.C., Malta
Sliema Wanderers F.C., Malta
Georg Wilhelm Wanderer, German portrait painter
Wanderer (company), a German automobile manufacturer
Wanderer (video game), 1986
Wanderer (AROS), a user interface based on Zune widget toolkit
The Wanderers (band), a 1981 punk band established by Stiv Bators
The Wanderer Tour, a 1981 concert tour associated with the Donna Summer album
World Wide Web Wanderer, an early web crawler
Wanderers, a 1909 Knut Hamsun anthology
Wanderer, the 1963 autobiography by Sterling Hayden
Wanderer butterflies, certain wide-ranging brush-footed butterflies: Bematistes aganice, a species of tropical Africa Danaus plexippus (monarch), a species of the Americas Pareronia, a genus of tropical Asia
Bematistes aganice, a species of tropical Africa
Danaus plexippus (monarch), a species of the Americas
Pareronia, a genus of tropical Asia
Wanderer above the Sea of Fog, an 1818 painting by Caspar David Friedrich.
